7/30/19

Raw sensations (qualia) are not relevant to our interests. We are only concerned with information that is interpreted as meaningful by means of a read operation (a perception). This is the realm of intelligence, of abstract (symbolic) reasoning.

The more diverse and detailed an animal's percepts are, the more sophisticated its intellect and inner life.

Percept: the result of perception by means of a subject's senses, a judgement of a concrete object external to the subject, vulnerable to cognitive bias (e.g. bad past experiences)

Concept: the result of conception by means of a subject's cogitative faculties, an abstract object formed through cogitation that is influenced by one's percepts

Percepts and Concepts are better thought of as signs corresponding to referents. The referent of a percept is an individual. The referent of a concept is a class. Both are maps of one's territory.

Intellect: the ability to perform operations on symbolic contents in order to generate semantic products, the logical/rational component of intelligence concerned with facts rather than feelings

Intelligence: the ability to perceive information (generate percepts) on which an intellect may operate in order to conceive knowledge (generate concepts) that may be used to further environmental adaptation or purposeful change

Phenomena are aggregates of:

Essential sensibles (syntax):

• Common sensibles (primary qualities): shape, size, number, ... (properties of objects, objective facts)

• Proper sensibles (secondary qualities): color, sound, taste, ... (sensations from objects, subjective experience)

Incidental sensibles (semantics): objects recognized as either particulars or indeterminate instances of universals

Habits are predictable intellectual reactions to recognizable percepts. Habits have complex origins, gradually shaped by various causes that are perceived consciously or unconsciously.

Non-human animals form desires that are influenced by genetic inheritance and habituated interpretation of percepts. They then leverage their intelligence to overcome obstacles to the objects of those desires. In addition to seeing things as objects of desire or obstacles, humans can also consider, by means of the intellect, the meaning of objects independent of how they relate to us (intelligibles).

Humans can perceive a single object in many different ways, depending on the context. We can perceive a coffee mug in and of itself, via the intellect, as a material entity of a certain form. But if we are suddenly attacked, we do not perceive it in this way. Instead, we consider how it may serve us as a weapon.